---
permalink: /projects-four/
title: "HRC Programme Four"
---

# Project 4: Filling gaps in OA knowledge: The cost-effectiveness of TJR in the Aotearoa health system

**Research questions:** What is the cost-effectiveness of TJR in the Aotearoa health system? How does the cost-effectiveness of TJR vary by disease stage, patient characteristics, and symptom profile at surgery? Is TJR delivered equitably in Aotearoa? 

**Design and methods:** Computer simulation modelling requires detailed input data describing the key relationships between patient attributes, event occurrence, and the cost and effects outcomes associated with disease states and interventions. In addition to data already used to provide inputs for our existing NZ-MOA simulation model, past HRC-funded projects, published results from the epidemiological literature, and findings from other projects within the Programme, we will conduct the additional empirical and epidemiological studies described below to provide necessary input data for modelling work. 
Equity of access to joint replacement surgery: We have previously described the equity of access to hip and knee TJR surgery in the public health system from 2006–2013 using the MoH’s National Minimum Dataset (NMDS), and projected total knee replacement surgery rates (Māori, non-Māori) to 2038 using the NZ Joint Registry (NZJR). While we found no inequity of access for Māori, non-urban, and more deprived subpopulations in the public health system, this does not provide the complete picture required for accurate modelling and equity analyses, as it fails to capture TJR provided by ACC and the private sector. We will overcome that limitation by leveraging two world-leading Aotearoa data resources: the NZJR and the IDI. We aim to link NZJR data with the IDI, and replicate the methods described in our earlier research110. Linking the important NZJR data resource would be a significant contribution to research capability in Aotearoa using the IDI. We have engaged with the Board of the NZJR and StatsNZ (Sept. 2021); should linking not be possible we will again use the MoH NMDS data and NZJR data directly, which is possible but with limitations of weaker ethnicity data, greater uncertainty in subpopulation identification, and blends ACC with private sector funded TJRs. This project will be led by Orthopaedic Surgeons Dr John Mutu-Grigg (Ngati Kahu, Te Rarawa) and Dr Simon Young (NZ Joint Registry Board member) as NZJR liaison. Analyses will be undertaken by Dr Pryymachenko.

Joint replacement surgery dominates the public health system costs for OA. It is highly effective and cost-effective, but exactly when it is best offered is not known. This project will investigate the cost-effectiveness of TJR surgery at differing levels of severity, using our data collected from patients undergoing TJR at Dunedin Hospital. The analysis will use a fuzzy regression discontinuity (RD) design. RD designs are a powerful method to estimate causal, quasi-experimental treatment effects from non-random allocation, by exploiting arbitrary treatment allocation rules in real-world settings. Due to increasing demand and limited capacity, access to TJR in the public healthcare sector is rationed in Aotearoa. At first specialist assessment, patients are evaluated using the NZ Orthopaedic Association Prioritisation Tool. A threshold Prioritisation Tool score (varying over time to reflect shifts in supply and demand) is used to determine eligibility for surgery: patients scoring above the threshold are considered for surgery, while those falling below are referred back to their GP for ongoing non-surgical management. As access is determined by local health system capacity to deliver surgery within prescribed waiting times, patients scoring just above and just below the threshold are otherwise similar and would both be expected to gain from surgery. The fuzzy RD design exploits the discontinuity in the likelihood of being offered surgery around the threshold value to identify the causal effect of TJR despite the non-random allocation of patients to surgical and non-surgical treatment. HRQoL and treatment costs over up to two years post-operatively will be estimated to conduct a cost-effectiveness analysis of surgical versus non-surgical management for these patients. This will be a unique study in the field.

**Research team:** Abbott (project leadership), Pryymachenko (data analysis expertise, esp. IDI); Wilson (advice on statistical analysis, IDI expertise, and simulation model inputs); Ligament injuries: Whittaker, Young; Joint replacement surgeries: Mutu-Grigg, Choong, Gwynne-Jones, Young, Dowsey; Opioid use: Choong, Dowsey, Buchbinder, Stokes; Primary care, interface with secondary care: Stokes, Gwynne-Jones; Kairangahau Māori rōpū, equity analyses interpretation: Mutu-Grigg, Kidd, Bell.
